Good afternoon, and welcome to Authoring
Dashboard Widgets.
My name is Christian Wagner.
I am a technical writer at Apple,
and we are going to spend the
next hour talking about Dashboard
Widgets in Leopard and on Tiger.
Before I go any further,
I wanted to remind you that
this is a hands-on session,
so if you don't have the code
for the hands-on already,
please go to the developer.apple.com
slash WWDC2006 and download the sample
code associated with this session.
There's three bits, resizer, sinker,
and birthdays,
so please make sure to get that.
Furthermore, I wanted to set your
expectations a little bit.
This session is for people who already
are familiar with widget development.
If you've never made a widget before,
we recommend that you go to the
Dashcode session tomorrow morning
at 9 o'clock in the Marina,
the Marina room,
not the north side of San Francisco,
and that you take advantage of the
things that Dashcode offers you.
Building a widget from
scratch isn't too hard,
but Dashcode makes it just
that much easier for you.
So let's get started.
Some of you are new,
and so I just wanted to recap
really quick what is Dashboard.
So this is your standard
issue Tiger desktop.
Not too much crazy going on there.
You notice that there's this
icon next to the Finder icon.
It's the Dashboard icon.
When you click on it,
this layer goes over your screen,
and this layer is Dashboard.
On the Dashboard,
you're going to find these handy
little programs called Widgets.
Widgets provide information,
access to information that you want.
You can use them to have at your
fingertips at a moment's notice.
To users, they appear as applications,
but underneath, they're really powered by
web technologies like HTML,
CSS, and JavaScript.
Additionally,
there's also some other technologies
you can take advantage of like
WebKit plugins and widget plugins.
So that's Dashboard.
Dashboard today, well,
as of this morning,
there's over 2,100 widgets in the wild,
and this has been the feature in Tiger.
When anyone talks about Tiger,
they think about the widgets.
And so how many of you have
already created a widget?
Can I see a show of hands?
All right, that's great.
Well, thank you.
We really appreciate it a lot.
You guys are the ones that helped make
this the feature in Mac OS X Tiger.
So thank you very much.
Give yourselves a round of applause.
So I want to take a moment
to show you some of the great
widgets that are out there.
The first one is iClip Lite.
And this is the winner of our
Apple Design Awards last night.
And we really like this widget
a lot because it's fun to use.
It's good looking.
It makes something that's normally
really mundane and boring,
like clipboard management,
but actually makes it fun to
use and looks really sharp.
So this is a great example
for you to learn from.
And I suggest if you've
never used it before,
you download it and take a look at it.
Another great one is Weatherbug.
This is a great widget
because it's actually branded
by the Weatherbug website.
They have a widget that
complements their website,
offers the information you
normally could get there,
but in a nice, compact,
good-looking form.
So that's another good
example for you to look at.
One that I like a lot
is this one called QXP.
And it's an expense tracker.
It's really good looking.
It's tiny.
And that's one thing I love about it.
It does what it's supposed to do
in the smallest space possible.
So that's another tip you
can take away from this.
And finally-- who doesn't
like the Gas widget?
With gas prices probably
going up again this week,
this is a great widget to
have on your dashboard.
And again, it's fun.
It has a lot of animation.
It's good looking.
But it's also really compact and
gives you the information you
want to have at your fingertips.
So that's really handy.
So we've told you a little
bit about Dashboard and Tiger.
Let's talk about Dashboard and Leopard.
And of course,
you can't talk about Dashboard and
Leopard without talking about Dashcode.
Dashcode is our new widget
creation environment,
and you should really check it out.
Even if you already are using
the good old tried and true
text editor and graphic editor,
Dashcode has a lot of features that you
can use to take your widget further and
integrate more of the great technologies
we've made available for you.
If you go to the Marina Room tomorrow
morning at 9:00 AM,
again, you'll learn more about Dashcode.
They're going to make
a phenomenal widget.
They're going to just walk
you through the whole thing,
so make sure to head over there.
CHRISTIAN WONG:
Another thing that's really changed
in Leopard is the architecture.
So this is the dashboard
architecture diagram you're
all used to seeing in Tiger.
And in it, you have the dashboard server,
which is what provides the
dashboard environment for you.
And then you have the dashboard clients,
which are each individual widgets.
And that means that each
widget has its own CPU,
its own memory, all these resources
all devoted to itself.
And then inside, there's a web view where
your widgets are running,
and a couple of other
associated good things.
But in Leopard,
we've changed this a little bit.
So what this diagram-- and you
might not notice a difference,
so let me go back one.
Tiger and Leopard.
The difference here,
in case you didn't notice it,
is that every widget is now running
in the same dashboard client.
So that means that each
widget is in its own web view,
but they're all inside the same process.
So why do this?
The number one reason is performance.
We get a two times speed increase
when loading your widget and
when working with widgets.
So that's the most tangible benefit
you get right off the top of the bat.
And we think this is going to
be a noticeable improvement for
users and for you developers.
There is a caveat to this.
If your widget uses a widget plugin,
we do actually load your class
of widget in its own process.
And that's because we need
to avoid namespace conflicts.
So if you are using a widget plugin,
you will be in your own process.
And this just further reinforces
the point that we like to use,
that you should try to do everything
you possibly can in JavaScript.
JavaScript has a lot of features,
it has a lot of API Therefore,
you use it before resorting
to a widget plugin.
This is different than
with internet plugins,
though.
So if you wrote a custom web kit
or internet plugin for your widget,
that is running the same space.
So now that all the widgets
are running together,
you really need to make sure you're
using unique class names and symbols.
For debug purposes,
there is a defaults write you
can use that will give you
the Tiger-style dashboard.
And that's defaults write
com.apple.dashboard processgrouping-int1.
If you didn't write that down,
we're going to demo it in a second,
so hold on.
And finally, the point,
the biggest point is now since
every widget's running together,
you really should never block.
And I really need to emphasize
that you should never,
ever, ever, ever block.
So what does that mean?
If you're using XML HTTP request,
use the asynchronous version.
Do not use the synchronous version.
If you're using widget.system
for command line utility,
make sure you are using
the asynchronous version.
If you're using the synchronous one,
you will be blocking
every widget on Dashboard,
not just the dashboard.
So this is really bad.
Make sure you're using
the asynchronous versions.
So I'd like to go hands-on now.
If we could go to demo one, please.
And I'm going to show you demo one,
please.
All right.
So what I'm going to show you
now is just a really quick
demo about the new dashboard,
to show you the new speed of
the new dashboard in Leopard.
So if you have a Tiger machine,
feel free to watch up here.
If you are running a Leopard machine,
feel free to follow along.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going
to launch the terminal application.
You'll find that in Applications,
Utilities, and
"Terminal" and I'm going to open it.
Is everyone with me?
Can I see a show of hands?
Alright.
CHRISTIAN WONG:
So I'm going to type in the command
that I showed you in the slide before.
But instead of typing,
I'm just going to drag
in a text clipping.
So again,
if you want to type this with me,
it's default, write, com.apple.dashboard,
and then I'm going to put a space there,
process-grouping-int1.
So I'm going to hit return,
and then I'm going to kill the doc.
And that's the process
that houses Dashboard.
So I'm going to kill the doc.
And so what I'm going to do then is
once the doc loads up here again,
I'm going to click on Dashboard.
So 1-1000, 2-1000, 3-1000, 4-1000,
5-1000, 6-1000, 7-1000, 8-1000, 9-1000,
10-1000, 11-1000.
Wow, you're getting the drift.
This is the Tiger Dashboard.
And so sometimes loading performance
can be a little bit suboptimal.
I'm going to hide Dashboard.
And now I'm going to delete that.
We're going to go back to
the Leopard Dashboard now.
So I'm going to do defaults.
And this time, I'm going to delete the
one that we just put.
So I'm going to do delete
com.apple.dashboard.
And then I'm going to
put process-grouping.
All right, everyone have that in?
We're going to hit Enter.
And then we're going
to kill the doc again.
All right, so now we're back up.
Ready to count with me?
I'm going to click Dashboard.
One 1,000, two 1,000.
That was two and a half 1,000.
So, you know,
this was a really good example,
but I think you get the idea that we've
got considerable speed improvements here.
So, thank you.
Back to slides, please.
So we think that the new
architecture in Dashboard,
I think it will thrill a lot of you.
I think you're going to get a lot
more responsiveness out of it.
Can I have slides, please?
Thank you.
So that's probably
going to be the biggest,
most tangible thing,
but another thing that we offer in
Leopard for Dashboard is Dashboard Sync.
So you may have heard this already,
but in Leopard,
your dashboard can sync via .Mac syncing.
So that means the presence of widgets
and their preferences can be synced
between different users using .Mac.
And the good news is that this is free.
You pretty much don't have
to do anything for this.
If a user uses Dashboard Sync
in the .Mac system preferences,
your preferences will get synced,
and it's great.
It's going to work fine.
But there is a little bit of a caveat.
And the thing is that you load your
preferences in your widget usually
when your widget first loads.
And so if your widget doesn't
reload anywhere in there,
you're not going to get any
changes in preferences that happen.
So we've provided in
Leopard a new API for this.
This is Widget On Sync.
And you're going to give it a handler.
And basically, that handler is called
whenever a sync event finishes.
So when that sync event finishes,
you just go through,
check all your preferences,
and update them as necessary.
So this is a really
nice way to handle it.
Just add a bit of polish.
But we think people are going
to be really excited about this.
And there's another thing
which you can do here,
and that's a sync exclusion.
If there's a preference that you have
that you would rather not have it synced,
you can, in your Info.plist,
exclude any preferences that
you would not like synced.
So you do that using
the sync exclusions key.
And then you provide it an array of
dictionaries where the first value,
the first key,
is the name of the preference that
you would like excluded from sync.
And the second key is
whether it's global or not.
So if you set global equal to true,
that means we're just going
to look for that name,
that string, and exclude it.
If you set it to be false,
we're going to look for the key.
But we're also going to look
for the widget identifier.
It's a common convention in widgets
that if you're doing per instance
widget preferences that you prepend
the key with the widget identifier.
And so if you're doing that,
we'll notice that,
and then we'll exclude that key as well.
So I'd like to go back to demo and show
you a little bit about syncing widgets.
So if you take a look at the sample code
that you downloaded for the session,
there's a project called Syncr.
And this works on Leopard only.
So if you're on Leopard,
feel free to follow along.
If you are on Tiger,
you might want to watch
on the screen here.
And for the first bit of this demo,
I'm actually going to be using a
fast user switching a little bit,
so you might be best off
to just watch me for a bit.
So I've got this widget here.
I'm just going to double
click on it and install it.
And when I do it,
it's actually really simple.
All this widget does is it
saves and retrieves preferences,
just a string.
So I'm going to put a string here,
and I'm just going to say, hi, mom.
I'm going to set that preference.
I'm also going to keep the widget.
Probably helps if I do that.
So that's pretty much it.
I've got this widget on my dashboard,
and I've got a string
set as a preference.
And just for demo purposes here,
I'm also going to add a
world clock widget here.
And I am going to set its location
to something else here in America.
I'm going to put it to
my hometown of Chicago.
So now that I've got
that on my dashboard,
those preferences are all stored.
I'm going to go in System Preferences,
and I'm going to go to .max sync.
I've already got my user
account set up here.
So I'm going to go to the Sync pane,
let this load.
And I'm going to sync this, my widgets.
So this is going to take
everything that's on my dashboard,
the presence of widgets,
and where they're located,
and their preferences,
and sync them to .mac.
So this might take a few seconds.
OK.
So now that's been stored on .Mac,
just like it's on my machine.
I'm going to switch users
to another user here.
This is going to take a second.
All right.
So now with this user,
I'm just going to go back
to the .mac prefpaint.
Again,
I've got the same .mac user set in here.
So now that I've got that preference,
I'm going to go to Sync.
And you'll notice that I already
have this prepared for Dashboard
Widgets to sync right there.
So I'm just going to say Sync Now.
Take a few seconds.
We're on the internet, of course.
All right.
And then now I'm going to
go down here to the dock,
click Dashboard.
And sure enough,
I've got a clock for Chicago and
my Syncr widget magically there.
So that's one half of the sync story.
We now have the same
dashboard on two computers.
Now what about this one?
Let's say I change the dashboard here,
and I want to then go
back to the other account.
So I'm going to change this preference
string back into "Hi Mom" here.
And I'm going to say, well,
for the time being, "Bye Mom."
I've set that preference.
So OK, we're going to go back to
System Preferences here,
into .mac, and we're going to sync
that back to my first user.
So this will take a few seconds again.
And then I'm going to go here back to
the account I was using a second ago.
And I'm going to sync the widgets again.
And then I'm going to go here back to
the account I was using a second ago.
And I'm going to sync the widgets again.
And sure enough, it says, "Bye, Mom,
now." So that's pretty much
the whole round tripping.
But you'll notice that Dashboard
didn't-- it did not reload
through that entire time.
So how did it know that it
should fetch a new preference?
Well, I used Widget On Sync for that.
So let's actually pop this
widget open really quick.
Let's take a look at the
code I used for that.
And it's actually pretty simple.
Now, for the purposes of this demo,
I am going to be using Dash Code.
I will be only opening
this widget in Dash Code.
So that means taking the
widget as it is on disk,
and just opening it up so I can
read the source code files,
and then also run it
in Dash Code if I like.
So I'm going to take the before version,
so if you look in your
version of it in before,
and open it on Dashcode.
So I'm going to take the before version,
so if you look in your
version of it in before,
and open it on Dashcode.
So I'm going to take the
before version of it in before,
and open it on Sync.
And we're going to say, hey,
call this Sync function, OK?
So I'm going to scroll
down to the bottom here,
and here's the Sync function.
It's basically two lines of code,
and all I'm doing is I'm turning off,
I'm showing an element
in the widget's UI,
and then I'm replacing the string.
I'm reading it from file, and I'm saying,
hey, just dump it in the widget.
So that's pretty much it.
It's pretty straightforward.
The only other thing that's
worthwhile of note here,
as I uncomment this,
is the fact that I'm using this make key
function to get the widget identified.
So I'm going to go back to the slides,
please.
So that's syncing widgets.
And the good news is that the
vast majority of it is free.
You should handle the
widget on sync event,
though.
It's really important.
It really kind of helps round
out the experience for users.
But you don't have to
if you don't like to,
or if you're not using preferences that
you need to keep updated very often.
So at this point,
I want to talk a little bit about some of
the technologies that are new in WebKit.
WebKit, if you don't know,
is the technology that underlies
every Dashboard widget.
And they've been doing some new
exciting things that you should
be aware of that you might want to
take advantage of in your widget.
The first of these is CSS borders.
They've implemented support for
adding a border radius on any div.
So this means that, whereas before,
you might have included rounded
rects everywhere in your widget's
implementation with rounded corners,
you don't need to do that anymore.
If you have a div that
has a border on it,
you can just apply the
WebKit border radius property to it,
and it'll just give you these nice,
pretty,
rounded corners all the way around.
There's also support for
border images as well.
So if you want to use that,
take a look into what
WebKit has to offer.
The next thing,
and this is just the beginning
of the high DPI story for both
Dashboard and for web pages,
are high DPI media queries.
These queries are directives you can
use in your CSS file to query if you're
on screen and the device pixel ratio.
So this is the magnification
that the user is running at.
And based on that decision,
you can supply different
resolution images.
This is a really big deal if you're
using custom images on your UI and
you'd like to be able to use the
appropriate resolution of image.
So you can use this in combination
with the background size,
WebKit background size property.
This allows you to scale
images appropriately based on
your entire web page or on the
entire size of your widget.
One thing which I missed in the
earlier bullet point there was
window.devicePixelRatio is a property
that was added to the window object.
And this gives you the ability
in JavaScript to find out
what the magnification is.
You can't just, it's not that you can
only do it from CSS.
You can do it from any
other object in the world.
And there's also some WebKit changes
you should be aware of.
Just some things that you might
be wondering if you're running
your widgets in Leopard why
they're not working quite right.
Be aware of these things.
And the first of one of
these things is that Canvas,
which we introduced in Tiger,
is now a standard.
If you use Firefox or Opera,
you'll see that the Canvas is now
supported in those browsers as well.
But part of the standardization
process is that it's a little
bit different than it was before.
So what does that mean?
Before, you might have been
using Canvas like this.
You said Canvas, gave an ID,
closed it off, and that was it.
Well, now in Leopard,
in WebKit in Leopard,
you will have to supply a width
and a height attribute as well.
And so the width and the
height are the size of the
buffer that's being drawn upon.
And then in CSS,
you can then position it and
size it however it need be,
and it'll scale it appropriately.
But you need to supply this
in your HTML file as well.
And then in addition to that,
Canvas now supports fallback content.
So that means if the
browser can't render that,
the Canvas,
you can put fallback content in there.
And then it's very important that
you always include then the ending
closing-- the ending Canvas tag.
If you don't do that,
WebKit will see the rest of the
web page as fallback content,
and that's probably not what you want.
So make sure you're using
that closing Canvas tag.
Another thing in Canvas,
and this is something
that is really handy,
is that the path buffer doesn't
clear automatically anymore.
You explicitly clear
it by calling new path.
So whenever you're drawing
a new path on the Canvas,
you should call begin
path to start a new path.
Other changes in WebKit include,
for arbitrary elements,
make sure you're using get attribute
to get an arbitrary HTML element.
Using the dot notation that's
common won't work anymore.
Always close your script tags.
It's pretty common for some people to
just use a closing slash on a script tag.
Instead,
explicitly use a closing script tag.
And finally,
if you're using display inline block,
the metrics have actually
been improved for that.
So if you're using it, go back,
make sure everything's looking right.
And the good news about all of
these changes is that for your
friends that aren't using Leopard,
they don't need Leopard
to check them out.
They can go to nightly.webkit.org,
get a new copy of WebKit,
and actually run their widget in there,
and they'll find out right away
what's going on with their widgets.
So that's a handy thing for you to do.
So dashboard in Leopard.
I think, well, first and foremost,
make sure you're going to the dashcode
session tomorrow morning and the marina.
It's my third time saying it,
and I'll keep saying it.
Dashcode's a great creation environment,
and you should really go there.
Go there, see what it has to offer.
So make sure you're going there.
You should definitely be aware that
widgets are now in one process,
so make sure that you're never
doing anything synchronously.
Dashboard sync is here.
Make sure you're handling
the widget.onsync event.
That way you can take advantage
of any preferences that
have changed during a sync.
And finally,
make sure you take into account for the
new WebKit enhancements and changes.
So we've talked about the
dashboard of tomorrow,
but Dashboard's here in Tiger today.
And there's some things that have come
out since we met last year that you
should probably take advantage of to
help make your widget more interactive,
more interesting,
and possibly complement your
existing Cocoa application,
too.
So the first thing I wanted to
talk about are the Apple classes.
And these were introduced
in Mac OS 10.4.3.
And these are a set of JavaScript classes
that provide common controls like the
Apple button or the Apple Glass button,
which you'll find on
the back of a widget,
usually, and the Apple Info button on the
front used to flip to the back.
In addition to that,
you'll also find things like
scroll bars and sliders.
And then finally, a neat little class
called Apple Animator,
which lets you animate over
a range of values over time.
So to use one of these classes,
you normally just... In your HTML file,
use a script tag to set its
source equal to one of the files.
And the files, the implementation files,
are in System Library, Widget Resources,
Apple Classes.
This is all in the documentation
available on the web,
if you're curious.
But from there, you would just include
the class that you need.
So in this case,
we're going to include an Apple button,
applebutton.js.
And then in our HTML file,
we're going to want to have a div.
So the div here is what's
going to hold whatever element
we're going to put into it.
In this case, we're going to put a
Glass button in there.
So in our JavaScript,
in an onload handler,
we're going to use a
specific constructor.
This is the Apple Glass button
constructor.
And it takes three things in there.
The first thing is the element,
which is going to house the button.
The second thing is the text
that you want the button to have.
And the third thing is the
handler that should be called
when the button is clicked.
So other constructors have other
sets of parameters that they take in.
We're just going to show off.
This is just the Apple Glass button.
Or you could use Dashcode.
Dashcode does all of this for you.
You just drag and drop
an Apple button on there.
You drag and drop an
Apple slider on there,
an Apple scroll area.
No code.
It's almost too easy.
We're making it too easy for you.
But I am going to talk about
one of these Apple classes,
which Dashcode doesn't
provide an API for,
or a UI for,
and that's the Apple Animator.
So the Apple Animator lets you animate
over a range of values over time.
Its base unit is an animation.
An animation has two properties.
The range of values,
so the starting and the finishing value,
and then an interval handler,
which is a function that's called
whenever the animation's value changes.
So you wrap an animation
inside of an animator.
Animators are timers,
and they take in also two parameters,
the first one being the period of time,
so how long you'd like the
animation to go on for,
and then the interval,
how often you'd like
the animation updated.
You can also have multiple
animations per animator.
You're not just stuck in a
one-to-one relationship there.
Once you've set this all up,
you'll be able to just
call start on the animator.
And that just tells it, hey, get ready,
get going.
And then every time the
interval is reached,
so every time you want
the animation to update,
the interval handler for
the animation is called.
And that allows you to actually
change whatever needs to be
changed for the animation.
So let's go hands-on on this.
And the good news about this sample,
if you can switch me to demo, please,
is that this works on Tiger.
So you don't need to
be on Leopard for this.
So if you open up the sample code
that we made for this session,
and you go to the
Before folder for a sizer,
you'll see that there's a widget here.
Everyone see that?
Can I see a show of hands, please?
Yeah.
Thank you.
Okay, so I'm just going to
double-click on this widget,
and I am not going to install it.
There's a little secret here.
If you hold down the
Command and Option keys when
the widget installer comes up,
you'll see that the Install button
changes to a Run button,
and that will run the widget in place.
So I'm going to click that,
and you'll see we've got a pretty bland,
boring widget here.
But in the top right-hand
corner is an Info button,
and that's the most important thing.
I'm going to click on that,
and I'm going to flip to the back,
and all of a sudden we get
this kind of clipped mess.
And the worst part about this
is that to get it to redraw,
okay, now I've got to move it.
So this isn't really pretty.
The problem we have here is that
we've got a front side that's
different than the back side.
So we're going to use an Apple animation
to actually shrink the front
side to the size of the back,
and then flip it over.
So that's kind of a
neat futuristic effect,
and I think your users will like it.
So, oh yeah,
and you flip it back to the front.
It wouldn't look too nice either, so.
So again,
I'm going to take the Resizer widget,
and I'm going to open it in Dash code.
But feel free to pop it open
in any text editor you like.
Everyone with me?
Can I see a show of hands?
All right.
CHRISTIAN WONG:
So now that I'm here in Dashcode,
I am going to actually hide the canvas.
Now again,
I have opened this widget in Dashcode.
This turns off most of its
code generation abilities.
I won't be able to drag
and drop any parts to it,
but it does let me use its code editor,
and it lets me run it and debug
it using Dashcode's facility.
So that's a handy feature if you
already have a widget and you don't
want to import it into Dashcode.
I'm going to hide the canvas here,
so I'm just looking at
the source code editor.
You can show the source code editor
by clicking the View Item here in the
menu bar and choosing Source Code.
And here we go.
So this is the JavaScript file
for our widget.
Is everyone seeing this?
So I'm going to actually
make this widget,
this window, as large as possible.
I'm going to scroll down
past the legal here.
And so what happens is,
what I'll tell you is that when
you click on the Info button,
this Show Prefs function is called.
So Show Prefs right now
just does two things.
It stores the height and width of
the front of the widget so that
we can use it later when we're
switching from the back to the front.
And then it also just calls the code
that actually does the flip animation.
So I'm going to add some code in here
that actually sets up the animation.
And I'm not going to use
any old Apple animation.
I'm going to use the
Apple Rect animation.
Apple Rect animation actually
gives me values in a rectangle,
so two sets of values.
And so to do that,
before we actually set up the animation,
we need to create two Apple rectangles.
So if you'll uncomment the
code that I have here in
this function here and here--
I'll walk you through it.
The first thing that we do
is we create two rectangles,
the first one being the starting rect.
This is where we're starting from,
the size of the front of the widget.
And then I'm creating a finishing rect.
That's the size of the back.
And here, it's got just two magic values,
320 and 150.
That's just the size of the back.
I'm telling you that.
So now that we have the rectangles,
our starting and finishing
rectangles in place,
I'm going to create
the new rect animation.
And then here I'm going to pass in the
starting rect and the finishing rect,
and then this rect handler.
So this is going to be called
every time the animation is fired,
every time it's triggered.
So if you scroll down underneath
the flip to back function here,
you'll see I have the rect handler here.
And all it's doing-- and it's
not terribly important-- is it's
actually resizing the widget window
and a few elements on its interface.
So just feel free to uncomment
that and follow me back up
into the set back function.
Okay, so we're back here to line 91,
where we have the
current racked animation.
So we've set that up,
and now I'm going to
create a new animator.
And the two values I'm going to pass
to the animator are 500 milliseconds,
that's how long I'd like
the animation to last,
and 13 milliseconds,
that's how often I'd like
the animation triggered,
how often I'd like to update its values.
So once I've done that,
I'm going to associate the animator
timer with the animation values,
using add animation.
I'm going to say, hey, when this is done,
flip the widget over to the back,
and then I'm going to
start the animation.
And that's pretty much that.
There's two lines that
I do need you to uncomment,
though, if you want this to work nicely.
And the first one is this flip to back.
Now our animation is handling this.
We don't need to do this manually.
And the second thing is,
in the actual flip to back function,
I have a line here that
says window.resize to.
Again, our animation is taking
care of the resizing,
so we can hide that.
So I'm going to actually run
this widget now in Dashcode,
show you what it does.
Okay,
so we've got our widget running here.
I'm going to move it up here,
and I'm going to make it really, really,
really big.
And then I'm going to do that.
You'll see that it's sucked up
to the size and flipped over.
There's also code in the sample that will
actually resize it on the way back out.
So if you click on the Done button,
it'll actually then flip it
over and resize it back out.
We won't go over that now,
but it's all there.
It's just commented out.
Feel free to take a look at that later.
All right, if I could go back to slides,
please.
So that's Apple Classes,
and you should really look
into them for three reasons.
First and foremost,
they'll save yourself a
lot of time and effort.
These are things that you won't
have to include tons of code
in your widget for anymore.
You just include these files,
use the appropriate constructor,
and you'll be set.
So your code will be less complex,
and that's really important too.
And finally,
the one added bonus here is that
you'll stay in sync with Apple.
If we ever update any
one of these things,
how they look, their behaviors,
you'll get them for free.
So use the Apple Classes if you'd like to
have standard controls provided by Apple.
So the next thing which I wanted
to talk a few minutes about is
the Quartz Composer WebKit plugin.
This is something new we've
shipped in Mac OS 10.4.7.
And this allows you to take a
Quartz Composer composition and
embed it inside of a widget.
And you would do that if you wanted
to have some tighter integration,
graphics integration,
and better motion graphics
inside of your widget.
To do this, you would use the embed tag,
just like you would for any
other plugin like QuickTime.
And important things you
need to pass in are the type.
So make sure that you're passing
in type x-quartzcomposer.
So this tells the browser to load the
Quartz Composer widget plugin-- or,
I'm sorry, a WebKit plugin,
not any other.
And then make sure you
provided a unique ID.
The reason you provided a unique
ID is if you'd like to interact with
your composition via JavaScript.
So for instance, in this function,
I'm obtaining the
composition from the DOM.
And I'm just telling it to pause.
I'm saying, you know what?
Whatever you're doing,
don't do it anymore.
And in this function,
I'm taking the composition
and I'm actually changing
one of its published keys.
If you're familiar with Quartz Composer,
you can take any value in
there and publish it as a key.
Well, this function, set input value,
allows you to specify the
key and a new value for it.
So you can pretty much interact
with any composition like
you normally would in Cocoa,
but you can do it from JavaScript.
At this point,
I'd like to go to demo and show you
some neat Quartz Composer widgets.
So I'm going to show my dashboard.
And the first widget I've got here is,
granted, not very exciting,
but it's a graph widget.
This widget is giving me some
statistics back on throughput.
And you'll see that I can
move it around here.
It's a cube with a
bunch of cubes in there.
And you'll see that I can
move the widget around,
show you just the bar graph.
I can also show you the
labels really nicely.
So it's a nice way to visualize data.
That's something that Quartz
Composer is really handy for.
OK, so this isn't terribly inspired.
I'll admit that.
So let's get rid of this guy
and show you another widget.
This is a widget that I came up with.
And what this widget does is it actually
gives you a little doodle board.
You can draw around
here inside of a widget.
And again, this white area here is just
a Quartz Composer composition
that I've come up with.
And then I've provided some controls.
So I can change the color,
and I can change the brush size.
And I can doodle around in
here to my heart's content.
I'm not feeling terribly creative today,
so I don't think you'll
get much out of me there.
And then you can clear it off.
And you get the idea.
Again,
this is all done with Quartz Composer.
And it's also done with Dashcode.
Dashcode has a Quartz
Composer template in there.
So it gives you a running start
if you ever want to use Quartz
Composer inside of a widget.
So definitely take a look at that.
So I'm going to hide this one.
This is one that I came up with,
and I kind of like this one a lot.
It turns out that the
United States Geological
Survey provides earthquake data.
And so they provide it in an RSS form.
So what I've done is I've
just taken that feed,
and I'm mapping the
RSS data on this widget.
So OK, it doesn't look like
much from where it is.
Let's take a look.
Let's zoom in a little bit.
So what I've done with Quartz Composer
is wherever the earthquake is,
I've provided this ripple animation.
It's something you really couldn't
do with the JavaScript canvas.
And there's no other nice way to do this,
save using a full-blown,
your own custom WebKit plugin.
So using Quartz Composer
is kind of a nice,
intermediate way to get this neat effect.
And the takeaway story here is
that try not to be gratuitous
with Quartz Composer.
Try to keep it measured.
Do neat things.
And I think it'll serve you really well.
Can we go back to slides, please?
So that's Quartz Composer,
and we think you'll really like that.
So the last part of the presentation,
I wanted to spend some time
talking about Cocoa integration,
and when you should make a widget.
So canonically,
we've always told you that you should
make a widget if you'd have a website,
and you'd like to distill some of
that information down to a handy
tidbit that you'd like to give users.
Or if you have a utility
that you use often,
and you'd like to offer a limited
version of it on your dashboard.
But the third time that you can make
a widget-- and this is something we
really wanted to emphasize-- is to
complement an existing application.
A good example of this, for instance,
is the iTunes widget.
The iTunes widget provides some
functionality that iTunes does,
but it's in a much smaller interface that
people can keep handy on their dashboard,
so they don't bring up their iTunes,
for instance, all the time.
My favorite example for this
is the TimeCard application.
You have a Cocoa application
that lets you specify users,
and different jobs for users,
and lets you print out bills,
and all this stuff that you normally
would want from a TimeCard application.
But a great widget for that
would be just really simple.
It has a pop-up menu on it
that lets you choose a job,
and then it'd have a big red
button on there that lets
you clock in and clock out.
Again, people won't have to launch
your entire application.
Just use the dashboard
widget and move on.
So whatever users are doing 90% of
the time with 10% of the effort,
that's perfect for a widget, usually.
So to talk more about Cocoa integration,
I'd like to bring up my colleague,
Matt Drance from DTS.
Thank you, Christian.
Can you guys hear me?
OK.
So as the slide says,
my name is Matt Drance.
I work in developer
support for Dashboard,
and I'm here to talk to you
guys about the stuff that
Christian couldn't get his head around.
That wasn't very nice.
So what is a widget plugin?
Well, basically it exposes native
services to JavaScript,
things that JavaScript out of
the box can't necessarily get to.
It can be used for things
like data retrieval,
API exposure for the rest of the system.
An example of this is the
address book framework,
which I'll show you in a moment.
And these are not graphical plugins.
Christian just was busy telling
you about WebKit plugins,
things like Quartz Composer,
the Quartz Composer plugin that's new.
And those are WebKit plugins.
Widget plugins are faceless, headless.
They're basically intended
for information retrieval.
So if you want to display something
in your widget with native code,
a WebKit plugin is what you want to use.
And the idea here is to open your own
apps and frameworks to your widget.
Maybe you have a common data
store that you can get to
with C or Objective C code.
Maybe you have an entire
framework that you've exported
as part of your application.
Christian mentioned the Timecode app.
If there's a tiny subset of functionality
that you want to expose to your users
in a very simple and clean fashion,
maybe this is one road you can take.
And as Christian kind of said also,
you really want to use this
as sort of a last resort.
You want to make sure that JavaScript,
DHTML, all of those technologies that are
normally available in Dashboard aren't
going to solve your problem in some way.
So now that I've just
told you not to do this,
let me show you how.
Can we go to the demo, please?
CHRISTOPHER PINTO: OK,
so the first thing I'm going to
do-- and those of you who may
have downloaded the samples,
you'll see the birthdays widget,
hopefully.
[Transcript missing]
This week, so we go on through to Sunday,
and then this month.
So for the rest of August.
And each of these is a clickable
link that will then open the
person in Address Book separately.
So how are we doing this?
JavaScript can't talk to
Address Book normally.
JavaScript doesn't know
what Address Book is.
So how do we get to this information?
Well, we're using a widget plugin.
So can we go back to slides, please?
So the first step is
installing the plugin.
Well, it's pretty simple.
It's just a simple bundle that goes
in the top level of your widget.
You can see a picture of it right here.
It has a file name
extension of .widgetplugin.
And you include a key in
your Info.plist named plugin
with the actual file name.
And that should have you ready to go.
The next step, of course,
is talking to the plugin.
Well, the plugin itself appears
in JavaScript as a member
variable on the window object.
So you can see here we're doing a
check for the window.birthdays plugin.
And we'll get to the origin
of that name in a second.
But basically,
just kind of like the window.widget
property that we check for
when using the Dashboard APIs,
we check for the existence of the plugin,
and then go ahead and call our methods.
And because this is part
of the window object,
you can use--you can reference it
either implicitly or explicitly.
And I'm doing both in that
example you see up there.
So actually writing the
plugin is pretty simple too.
It's just a standard foundation bundle in
Xcode that you then customize slightly.
You write the code that you need to.
In this case, we're writing code that
talks to the address book.
You register the plugin
with JavaScript so that your
JavaScript code can see it.
And then you grant access to
the methods in the plugin.
The entire plugin doesn't
become scriptable by default.
It's going to be up to you to decide
what's scriptable and what isn't.
And the other thing you can do,
this is not required
but highly recommended,
is to create JavaScript-friendly
signatures for your methods.
Obviously,
Objective-C and JavaScript don't
use the same syntax.
So if you have some complex
methods that you want to expose,
the names can get pretty mangled.
So you should probably do this
yourself rather than trust us
to mangle the name for you.
So, the first step, of course,
is to initialize the plugin.
And this is the one required method
in the widget plugin protocol,
and that's init with WebView.
This is just a standard
Cocoa object initializer.
If any of you have done
Cocoa development before,
you should know what I'm talking about.
It is required, but it typically doesn't
have a lot in it.
Depending on how
complicated your plugin is,
this may have one line of code,
it may have 20.
The important thing to mention here is
that you really don't want to manipulate
the WebView that is passed into you here.
This WebView represents
your Dashboard widget.
But there will be a time and a place,
if you need to manipulate the
DOM from inside your plugin,
you want to do that after initialization.
This is really just
the object initializer.
This is not the initialization
of the widget proper.
And the other thing I wanted to
mention is that you need to start
implementing a dealloc method.
For those of you who have
written plug-ins in the past,
you've probably gotten away
with not writing a dealloc,
because every widget has
been in its own process,
and the only time the plug-in is going
to be unloaded is when the user closes
the widget and the process is dead.
So the cleanup really isn't important.
But now, in the advent of process
sharing in Leopard,
your widget may close and
your plug-in may be unloaded,
but the process will still be there.
So it's going to be up to you to
be responsible with resources.
So if you have a plug-in that
allocates a bunch of member objects,
make sure you implement your
dealloc method so that you
can clean all that stuff up.
So registering the widget plug-in.
You'll remember in our
JavaScript code up on the slides,
we were referring, in JavaScript,
we were referring to our plug-in
as the birthdays plug-in.
So this is where that name comes from.
It's the Windows Script Object Available.
This is actually part of the web kit,
web scripting protocol.
This is not a dashboard API.
And this is how you identify
the plug-in to JavaScript.
You implement this method,
and the Web Script Object that you
passed is actually a wrapper pointer
to the Window Object in JavaScript.
And basically,
you just set the current plug-in instance
as a value on that Window Object,
which is what allowed us to use
the Window dot notation earlier on.
So that string, birthdays plug-in,
that you see up here is exactly
the name of the variable that
we're going to be referring to
our plug-in from using JavaScript.
So now this is the
real meat of the topic.
This is where you start actually
exposing the functionality that you
want to use from inside Dashboard.
The first is,
is selector excluded from web script?
This is basically a filter on
all the methods that you've
written in your plugin,
as far as which ones you
actually want to be scriptable.
And you notice that
the method is excluded,
not included,
so there's a double negative
thing going on here.
You return yes when you don't
want the method to be scripted.
You return no if you do.
That's bitten a couple people.
So if you find your plugin
being universally scriptable,
Check this.
And the other one is the is
key excluded from web script.
And we usually recommend that you just
return yes to this under all conditions.
That's yes, I don't want it exposed.
So if you have a key on the plugin
that you want to be exposed,
go ahead and encapsulate it,
write an accessor method,
and expose that instead.
And the last one is the web
script name for selector method.
And this is the one where you can
take your Objective-C function name,
method name, and turn that into something
that's more readable by JavaScript.
And this is very important.
It's not required,
but if you have an Objective-C method
with multiple arguments,
then you're going to start getting
colons and separate tokens in there.
And those things don't really
make a lot of sense in JavaScript.
So this is your opportunity to write
a JavaScript method name that's
going to make sense to you when
you're writing in JavaScript code.
So let's go back to the demo.
I can show you what some
of this stuff looks like.
So the first thing I want to do is just
have a quick look inside the bundle,
or I could open the widget again.
So for those of you who haven't
played around with widgets too much,
you can just right-click or control-click
on the widget itself in the finder.
Click Show Package Contents,
and this looks a lot like
the slide you saw before.
Here's our plugin with the
.widget plugin extension,
and it's good.
We have Property List Editor installed.
So I'm going to open the plist,
and this is the key that's going
to make the Dashboard client
actually pick the plugin up.
So as you can see, the name here matches
the name in the finder,
and it's pretty much that simple.
That's what you need to do to tell
Dashboard to recognize your plugin.
So once Dashboard has recognized
your plugin and tried to load it,
there's other work that needs to be done.
But let's stick with
the widget for a second.
I'm going to go ahead and
open this in Dashcode,
just like Christian did before.
And let's get rid of the canvas.
Let's see the source code.
So I'm going to go into the script here.
So let's get past the
legalese for a moment,
and let's have a look at
Show Today's Birthdays.
So I'm doing some general markup
work here in the JavaScript,
and then here's our plugin code.
How does that look?
Oh, that's nice and big.
So first we check for the
existence of the Birthdays
plugin on the window object.
This looks a lot like the slides.
And if it's there,
we go ahead and we call
the BirthdaysToday method.
And then we go ahead and
process that information.
It's going to return an
array of information for us.
So the question is,
we've already answered some of it,
where does this name come from?
And then also,
where are these method names coming from?
In order to do that, we need to go out of
Dashcode and go into Xcode.
So I'm going to open up this project,
and we're just going to run
through all of the methods in here.
This plug-in is actually pretty simple,
as you can see.
I mean, it's got a very small,
defined set of tasks that it performs.
Here's some more legalese.
So the first thing I want to do
is I just want to have a real
quick look at the code itself.
And if you're looking at the
sample that you downloaded,
you should probably see some pragma
marks in here that classify the
methods based on what they do.
So this should be listed under AB logic.
So, oh, this is the header font.
Excuse me.
That's why I don't see them.
There we are.
So let's go ahead and just look at
the people with birthdays and future.
So basically I'm going
to give an interval,
so one in the case of a day,
seven in the case of a week, et cetera.
And this is it.
This is really all the Cocoa work
we're doing in terms of business logic.
We're just going ahead and
creating a search and address book,
and then we're going to return an array
of all the people that match the current
interval on their birthday property.
So let's go back up to the
actual widget plugin stuff.
So here's our initializer.
And as I said,
depending on what you're doing,
this method may have a lot of
stuff or it may have nothing.
In this case,
it's just a simple initializer
that defers to the superclass.
So then when it starts
to get interesting is the
Windows Script Object Available method.
Again, we have this web script
object that's passed into us,
which represents the window
object up in JavaScript land.
And we simply set ourself as
a key on the window object.
And if I were to change this
name and rebuild the plugin,
then I would accordingly have to go and
change all the variable names that I used
in my JavaScript code to refer to this
Now we move on to the is key and is
selector excluded from web script.
And like I said,
we don't want to really have
direct key access from scripting.
It's kind of just asking for trouble.
So we return yes all the time.
Yes, we want it excluded.
And then we have is selector
excluded from web script and
web script name for selector.
Now there are a couple
things you can do here,
and I got a little clever.
I don't want to spend
too much time on it.
But a lot of times people just get the
selector name as a string and have a huge
if else block in this method to see yes,
no, yes, no, I want it.
So in this case,
what I've done is defined a prefix here,
and for all the methods that
I actually want exposed,
I preface each method
name with web underscore.
And so I basically just do
a search for that prefix,
and if it's there, then yes,
we'll script that.
And it's a little more complicated,
but it has less code.
And I tend to like that.
So here's our web exposed methods,
and you'll see this is the final part.
You'll notice that I'm not
actually calling the address
book method that you saw before.
I'm calling something called
string results for people.
So let's go ahead and see what that does.
The key here is that the previous
method that I wrote that actually
performs the search in address book,
that search is going to return me
an NSArray of AB person objects.
Now, similar to the other stuff
we've been talking about,
JavaScript does not know
what an AB person is.
So it's going to be our job to take
this information and convert it into
something that JavaScript is actually
going to be able to work with.
So in this case,
I'm taking an NSArray of people,
and this is going to be
an array of AB people.
So I'm going to send an array
of people to the address book,
and I'm going to send an array
of people to the address book.
And this is going to be the key
method behind all of the web exposure.
So now, instead of an array of AB people,
we're going to be sending
an array of NSStrings.
And with that final piece of information,
I'd like to go back to the slides
and talk about one last thing.
So, let's talk a little bit
about this data conversion.
I mentioned that the NSStrings are
going to be readable.
And that's because some of this stuff
is converted for you for free by
the Objective-C JavaScript bridge.
Most of them are primitive types.
You see them up here.
An NSNumber becomes a
number in JavaScript.
NSString becomes a string.
An NSRay becomes an array.
I have an asterisk there,
not because it's a pointer to an array.
There are no pointers in JavaScript.
This is not a true
JavaScript array object.
For all your standard uses,
it will be for you.
You can index it.
You can get the link on it.
You can modify the contents.
But in terms of the real object-oriented
array class in JavaScript,
it does not have all of those properties.
But 99% of the time, this is going to do
exactly what you need.
So, from the plugin,
we returned an NSArray of NSStrings.
And actually,
it was a two-dimensional array.
I forgot to mention that.
It was a two-dimensional array.
Each entry in the first level
is a record for the person.
And then each entry in the second
level is a record for the person.
And then each entry there also has
separate tokens for the first name,
last name, and birthday.
So we've got a 2D array of
NSStrings that was successfully
converted and usable from
JavaScript without any additional work.
So for more complex JavaScript objects,
the non-trivial ones,
those simply get wrapped in
a WebScript object instance.
And you saw that in the
WindowsScriptObjectAvailable method.
That passed in a
WebScript object pointer that,
in this case, represented the window
object from JavaScript.
So that's your crash course on plugins.
And I'd like to bring in
Christian for the rest.
Thank you, Matt.
And really quick,
to just kind of clarify,
the great thing about using
a widget plug-in is that if
you have a Cocoa application,
you'll be able to make a widget
that complements your application.
This is something you can do today.
You don't have to wait a
year for Leopard to come out.
You'll be able to make a
widget as a feature of your
program and ship it today.
And we really want to
encourage you to do that.
Really jump on this bandwagon.
People really like widgets,
and people are anxious to have them.
So you really should be giving
one if you have a Cocoa app.
So just to wrap things up,
I want to talk a minute
about sharing your widget.
And the most popular place for
people to download widgets from
is the Apple Downloads site.
The 2,100 widgets I talked about
before are all available from
apple.com/downloads/dashboard.
And this is the place to go for widgets.
People go here to download
them all the time.
We list them,
and we have top 50 and the newest ones.
It's a great place for that.
And we actually have a new submission
process in place at connect.apple.com.
And the great thing about
this is that when you submit
a widget through this process,
you'll be able to have a listing
that's actually perpetual.
And so you can just go
there and update it,
instead of before when you just
had to update your widget each time
you wanted to put it on the site.
So that's really handy.
And it also ties into the
download verification feature.
The point behind this is to make
sure that people are getting the
widget they expect to be getting.
So in closing.
Leopard.
In Leopard, the message is that
widgets are here to stay.
They're not going anywhere.
They're popular, and people love them.
So say hello to Dashcode.
Use it.
It has amazing features that will
help you make amazing widgets,
great-looking widgets.
It's also a lot faster,
so people will be happy with
the performance we're hoping.
And you also should be able
to handle a sync event.
So if your widget deals with preferences,
make sure you're handling
a sync event as well.
But today, in Tiger, make a widget.
It's a great way to differentiate
your application from any
other one on the market.
Simplify it using the Apple Classes.
Quartz Composer helps you integrate
great graphics into your widget.
Compliment your widget
with an application.
I really want to beat home that point,
I guess.
It's really important.
And finally, when you're ready,
submit it to Apple.
So your roadmap for
the rest of this week,
there's a widget lab in Mac OS X lab
right across the hall right after this.
Tomorrow morning, 9 a.m.
in the marina, for the fourth time,
I'm telling you about the
Introducing Dash Code session.
It's a great session.
These guys build a widget
from stem to stern,
and it looks phenomenal.
You guys are going to love it.
So make sure you're there,
and you grab the sample code first.
And then after that, at noon,
there's the Dash Code lab,
also in the Mac OS X lab across the hall.
And then tomorrow afternoon,
there's a WebKit lab.
So if there's any questions
you have about WebKit,
not necessarily the dashboard-specific,
head over there.
That's at 3.30, also in the Mac OS X lab.
So if you have any questions,
there's a fella, Alan Samuel.
Bluger1 at Apple.com
is his email address.
He's our evangelist,
and you should email any
questions you have to him.
And feel free to join our community
at dashboard-dev at lists.apple.com
for any questions you have,
any questions about
Dashboard or Dash Code.
Well, actually, not Dash Code yet.
It's not shipping, so just for Dashboard.
But feel free to come on
there and ask your questions.